in the summer of 1990 i was twenty one. the previous fall i’d become a research assistant with the hst astrometry group - university of texas astronomy department and mcdonald observatory. the berlin wall had fallen in november and hubble had launched in april. i lived in a single room off the back patio of a historic house just north of campus. my landlady, martha ann zively, an eighty three year old local legend, lived overhead. rent was one hundred fifty dollars a month. a decent personal computer had a 386, 1 mb ram, and a 40 mb disk. twin peaks would appear in a few months and the austin garage rock scene was again gathering steam.
paul hemenway explained the group’s projects and where i might be capable of helping. hst was designed to provide next generation active guiding. high angular resolution is useless if smeared by motion. three optical interferometers were mounted on robotic arms in the focal plane - the fine guidance sensors. an fgs would monitor a star and provide feedback to the hst attitude control system. the point was to simultaneously push the limits in two subsystems whose effects were highly coupled - optics and pointing. so how to evaluate and calibrate them? you need a reference that is known exactly...
we would use asteroids - this was the texas minor planet project. with ray duncam’s group in the center for space research and aerospace department, we could refine knowledge of asteroid orbits to the point where their predicted positions and motions were more exact than hst observations. the primary tools for this would be a dec vax/vms cluster at csr, the astronomy department vax 11/780 running bsd unix, various unix and vms workstations, and the 82 inch telescope at mcdonald - an art deco era west texas timewarp. the 82 inch had the light gathering power to image an asteroid on a sensitive photographic glass plate, given enough time. guiding during the long exposure depended on a data general nova and a suitcase sized camera. 
this was the cass cam - a very 80s piece of technology. primary guiding was by an image dissector, a photomultiplier tube attached to the side of the camera and looking a bit like a large engine part. its circular field of view was divided into four quadrants. a star in the camera focal plane was placed in the center, and the closed loop control system was activated. every second, with a loud mechanical click, the system would adjust the camera position to keep the guide star in the center of the image dissector. to get a feel for how analog this all was, picture the start of a night of observing…
down in the control room which curved in a ring below the dome main floor, the minicomputer had to be booted and master programs started. the dome had been opened to equalize temperature as the sun set, and from the control room one could step outside onto the catwalk running around the outside of the dome for a spectacular view of shadows growing out from the mountains across the high desert and an endless blue sky. various minicomputers and other obsolete hardware crowded the control room with abandoned sets for multiple 60s scifi movies. the curvature of the room did nothing to detract from the wornout cold war bunker vibe. neither did the bank of red leds showing the sidereal time and telescope pointing and the 80 character ascii glow from various terminals scattered about.  
when it grew dark, it was time to prepare the asteroid exposure. each of the fresh photographic plates were already in an individual envelope and the stack of plates for the night were resting on a desk in the control room. time to carry them, carefully, up to the telescope. on entering the dome, it was pitch black except for the glow of another bank of red leds on the main console and the clouds of stars in the open telescope slit. this was a deep space starship. the telescope loomed overhead, filling the vast dome. again very carefully, climb up onto the circular telescope floor. it is raised and lowered to keep below the base of the telescope, and respect has to be payed at all times in the dark. one can fall dangerously far off the telescope floor down to the dome floor. guiding parameters for the target asteroids had already been computed on the nova and jotted down in the observing log with notes matching to those on the plate envelopes.
