in the summer of 1990 i was twenty one. the previous fall, i’d become a research assistant with the hubble space telescope astrometry group in the university of texas astronomy department and mcdonald observatory. the berlin wall had fallen in november. hubble had launched in april. i was living in a one room apartment by the back patio of a historic house just north of campus. my landlady, martha ann zively, an eighty three year old local legend, lived overhead. rent was one hundred fifty dollars a month. a decent personal computer had 1 mb ram and a 40 mb disk. twin peaks would appear in a few months, and the austin garage rock scene was again gathering steam.

paul hemenway explained the group’s projects and where i might be capable of helping. hst was designed to provide next generation active guiding. high angular resolution is useless if smeared by motion. three optical interferometers were mounted on robotic arms in the focal plane - the fine guidance sensors. an fgs would monitor a star and provide feedback to the hst attitude control system. the point was to simultaneously push the limits in two subsystems whose effects were highly coupled - optics and pointing. so how to evaluate and calibrate them? you need a reference that is known exactly...

we would use asteroids - this was the texas minor planet project. with ray duncam’s group in the center for space research and aerospace department, we could refine knowledge of asteroid orbits to the point where their predicted positions and motions were more exact than hst observations. the primary tools for this would be a dec vax cluster at csr, the astronomy department vax 11/780 running bsd unix, various unix and vms workstations, and the 82 inch telescope at mcdonald. it could image an asteroid on a glass photographic plate, given enough time. guiding during the long exposure depended on a data general nova minicomputer and a suitcase sized camera. 

this was the cass cam - an advanced piece of 80s hardware. guiding used an image dissector, a photomultiplier tube attached to the side of the camera and looking a bit like a motor part. its circular field of view was divided into four quadrants. a star in the camera focal plane was placed in the center, and the closed loop control system was activated. every second, with a loud mechanical click, the system would adjust the camera position to keep the guide star in the center of the image dissector. to get a feel for how analog this all was, picture the start of a night of observing…

down in the control room which curved in a ring below the dome main floor, the minicomputer had to be booted and master programs started. the dome had been opened to equalize temperature as the sun set, and from the control room one could step outside onto the catwalk running around the outside of the dome for a spectacular view of shadows growing out from the mountains across the high desert and an endless blue sky. various minicomputers and other obsolete hardware crowded the control room with abandoned sets for multiple 60s scifi movies. the curvature of the room did nothing to detract from the worn out cold war bunker vibe. neither did the bank of red leds showing the sidereal time and telescope pointing and the 80 character ascii glow from various terminals scattered about.  

when it grew dark, it was time to prepare for the first exposure. the stack of plates for the night were resting on a desk in the control room, each its own envelope. time to carry them, carefully, up to the telescope. on entering the dome, it was pitch black except for the glow of another bank of red leds on the main console and the clouds of stars in the open telescope slit. the telescope loomed overhead in the darkness. very carefully climb up onto the circular telescope floor. it moves to keep below the base of the telescope and one could easily walk off the edge high above the dome floor. guiding parameters for the target asteroids had been computed and noted.

when standing below the telescope, the cass cam hangs at eye level. it's a boxy white instrument, and sliding out the plate cover on its bottom opens a rectangular frame of stars large enough to rest your head inside. the shadow of the telescope secondary mirror and its supports are at the center high overhead. this is the focal plane, where a plate will be fastened for exposure. it's time to adjust the secondary for focus. this is done with a knife edge. a plate shaped metal frame is fastened into the focal plane - at its center it holds a straight metal blade. when the telescope is in focus, this blade cuts off the light of a star suddenly and completely. the telescope hand controller is used to move the telescope and place a star at the knife edge. then the secondary mirror is commanded to move in or out with a loud mechanical whir, until the star's light is cut off cleanly. if there is a bit of spare time, the knife edge frame can be replaced with another metal frame holding the eyepiece - a heavy glass lens that requires both hands to lift. peering in, one can see by eye a mysterious and colorful world of planets, nebulas, and spiraling galaxies...

during the exposure the cass cam operates in two modes. in stellar guiding mode the image dissector maintains a lock on a guide star by commanding the cass cam to move relative to the telescope. to prepare for this, the dissector has to be manually locked on to the guide star. the telescope is first pointed directly at the computed position of the asteroid. this means the slow swing of the telescope and dome across the sky, and adjustment of the observing floor height so it's comfortable to work. the asteroid is not visible, but it's now in the field of view of the cass cam plate holder. now to lock the dissector on to a guide star. at the rear of its cylindrical housing is a round phosphorus screen glowing green, not too different from an old school oscilloscope. an x and y axis divide the screen into four quadrants. when the light of a sufficiently bright star falls into the photo multiplier tube at the dissectors heart, photons cascade down and form a dim blob on the screen. with one of these blobs at the center of the screen, the dissector is activated and begins trying to keep the blob there, with a loud mechanical click every second. this steady clicking heartbeat soon fills the silence of the dome.

with the cass cam in guide star tracking mode, each star will make a small dark spot in the plate's photographic emulsion during the exposure. now to prepare for mode two. with the high angular resolution and small field of view of the telescope, during an exposure of around ten minutes the motion of asteroids relative to the sky is significant. the relative direction and rate of the asteroids motion was computed earlier by the nova down in the control room. the cass cam is bodily rotated relative to the telescope and programmed to move at the appropriate rate so that in mode two the asteroid is motionless relative to the plate. stellar guiding is off. the clicking heartbeat of the image dissector goes silent. the sky turns while the asteroid builds up its own small gaussian peak in the emulsion. then the steady clicking returns. stellar guiding mode again. the result is a dumbbell shape for stars, with two circular peaks connected by a trail. the asteroid is a trail with a single circular peak at its midpoint.
